What if I told you that the reason you, you know, just cannot stop scrolling through infuriating arguments on your phone
and the specific mechanics of how your brain generates a hallucination
and the mathematical rules that tell a quantum particle how to move are all driven by the exact same equation?
It sounds completely ridiculous when you say it all in one breath like that.
Right. I mean, it sounds like a late night dorm room conspiracy theory.
But we are tearing down the walls between physics, psychology and the gig economy today.
Welcome to the deep dive. You and I are tackling a, well, a radically ambitious 2026 paper by an independent researcher named Flyxion.
Yeah. It's titled From Field Dynamics to Extractive Systems, a unified account of coarse graining cognition and economic structure.
Which is a mouthful. But our goal here is to dissect a premise that, at first glance, sounds completely absurd.
It does. It really does sound absurd on its face. I mean, the instinct is to assume we're dealing with a loose metaphor, right?
Yeah.
Because it's very common to say, like, a social network has momentum or that a market reacts like a physical system.
Sure. People say that all the time.
But what Flyxion is proposing is not a metaphor. The author argues for a categorical and dynamical unification of these domains.
Okay, wait. Meaning what, exactly?
Meaning they're claiming that the underlying structural mathematics, the literal algorithms of reality, are identical across these completely different scales of existence.
Okay, I got to jump in right there. Because my first reaction reading this was just deep, deep skepticism. I immediately thought, you know, economics is not physics.
Right.
You can't just map human behavior perfectly onto subatomic particles. I mean, we've seen economists try to do that for decades with, like, rational choice theory. And it usually fails because humans are messy. We're unpredictable.
We are very messy.
So how does the author avoid falling into that trap of, I don't know, reductive, naive physics envy?
By explicitly avoiding a direct point-to-point mapping of the objects themselves.
Mm-hmm.
Flitchin warns against what they call a naive identity.
Okay.
The argument actually relies on a branch of mathematics called category theory, and specifically the use of structure-preserving functors.
Structure-preserving functors.
All right. Pretend I haven't taken a high-level math class in 10 years.
Sure. A functor is basically a mathematical translator. It takes the structure of one category and maps it onto another, while perfectly preserving the relationships between all the different parts.
Oh, okay.
So what's fascinating here is the author isn't saying a digital gig worker is a photon or that a thought is a vector field.
Because that would be insane.
Exactly. The objects are entirely different. What's invariant stays exactly the same is the mathematical structure of how information is processed, compressed, and projected.
Ah, I see. So it's the process that is universal, not the actual stuff being processed.
Yes. Specifically, it's the math of how a high-dimensional, just infinitely complex underlying reality gets compressed or coarse-grained into a simplified interface that a localized observer can actually interact with.
Wow. Okay. So whether that observer is a measurement device in a quantum lab or the visual cortex of your brain trying to process light or like a social media algorithm trying to rank a billion posts.
The fundamental math of how they compress that overwhelming complexity into a usable interface is governed by the exact same functorial structure.
Yes. That reframing helps a lot. So we're really looking at the universal math of compression and projection.
Precisely.
Okay. To really grasp how this applies to something like a toxic digital platform, which we'll get to start where the author starts, at the absolute basement of reality.
The literal ground floor.
The underlying code of the universe itself. So the paper introduces a foundational framework for physics called the RSVP substrate.
Right. Relativistic Scalar Vector Plenum.
RSVP. So in this model, it describes reality as a coupled field system defined by a deterministic microstate denoted as X of T.
What exactly is in this microscopic state?
So the microstate, this X of T, is a continuous, dynamically coupled triple. It consists of three components that together cover the entire manifold of reality.
Okay. Three parts. What's the first one?
The first component is phi. It's a scalar potential. You can basically visualize this as a landscape of energy.
It encodes the raw energy density of the system at any given point.
So, like, if we picture a topographical map, phi is the varying elevation, like the hills and valleys of energy density.
Yeah. That's a really solid way to visualize it.
And then the second component is a little V, which stands for a vector field.
If phi is the topographical landscape, the vector field represents the directional flow across that landscape.
It dictates movement, orientation, how things transport across the energy gradients.
Like wind or water currents flowing over those hills and valleys.
Exactly like water flowing over a riverbed.
Okay. That makes sense. We have an energy landscape and we have a directional flow over it.
But the third component, this is where I hit a massive conceptual roadblock when I was reading.
The entropy density.
Yes. The third component is big S, representing an entropy density.
I mean, I've always been taught that entropy is an emergent property.
Right. The second law of thermodynamics.
Yeah. It's the result of a system.
You have a clean room, time passes, you leave clothes everywhere, and the messiness of the room is the entropy.
It's an outcome.
So how can entropy be baked into the foundational microscopic starting conditions of reality?
You've hit on one of the most radical departures in the RSVP framework from standard model physics.
Okay. So I'm not crazy.
Not at all.
In classical thermodynamics, just like you noted, entropy is a statistical measure of disorder that emerges when you zoom out.
But Flyxion argues that these three fields, the energy landscape phi, the directional flow vector V, and the entropy density S, are dynamically coupled from the very beginning.
From the very beginning.
So it's not an afterthought.
It is not an afterthought or an emergent artifact of our observation.
It acts as a foundational, coarse-grained measure of microstate multiplicity.
I am going to need you to unpack measure of microstate multiplicity because that is thick.
Are they saying the universe is fundamentally fuzzy at the bottom?
Basically, yes.
They're saying that the constraint connecting these three variables is variational and dynamical.
Think of your water flowing over a riverbed analogy again.
Okay.
The entropy density S is partially determined by the curvature of the energy landscape, phi, and crucially, by the torsion, or the twisting in the directional flow V.
The twisting?
Yes.
As the flow twists and interacts with the landscape, it generates a fundamental multiplicity of possible states.
If we connect this to the bigger picture, the observable structure of the universe doesn't come directly from accessing this raw X of t reality.
Because we can't see the raw code, the universe doesn't give us access to the uncompressed file.
Exactly.
We only ever interact with limited projected views of it.
The deterministic dynamics evolve this triple according to partial differential equations.
But any local observer, like any subsystem trying to interact with another part of the system, is strictly bounded by thermodynamic consistency and limited information.
Which means we have to compress it.
We have to.
If the RSVP substrate is this impossibly massive, high-dimensional, raw image file taking up exabrates of underlying data,
any entity trying to survive in that universe has to compress that file into something manageable.
Right.
And this brings us to the author's concept of coarse graining, which they formalize under a very intimidating acronym, TARTAN.
Yeah.
Trajectory aware, recursive tiling with annotated noise.
TARTAN.
Every single word in that acronym is doing significant mathematical heavy lifting.
Okay.
Let's break it down maybe using the image file analogy.
Sure.
Let's try that.
So say I have an incredibly detailed 4K photograph of a forest, right?
But my phone only has a few kilobytes of storage left.
I have to compress it into a highly pixelated JPEG.
I lose millions of distinct colors and sharp lines, but I get a file I can actually open and process.
Right.
So coarse graining is essentially pixelating the universe.
You are averaging out the overwhelming detail into manageable chunks.
But standard pixelation just chops the image into a neat grid of distinct separate squares.
TARTAN is doing something much stranger.
The tiling here isn't just a grid.
The tiles overlap.
The overlap is the core structural innovation here.
In TARTAN, the covering of the manifold, the way we place these tiles over reality, which the paper labels T sub I, is not a strict mutually exclusive partition.
The boundaries of the tiles bleed into one another.
Okay.
And the mathematical term for this specific type of overlapping projection is sheaf-like.
Sheaf-like.
I mean, I have heard the term sheaf used in agriculture, like a sheaf of wheat.
How does it apply to geometry and data projection?
So think of it more like a set of overlapping architectural blueprints for a massive complex building.
Okay.
Blueprints.
You might have one blueprint for the electrical system of a room and another overlapping blueprint for the plumbing of that exact same room.
Yeah.
Because the projection is sheaf-like, these overlapping blueprints absolutely must agree on the dimensions of the physical walls they share.
Right.
The overlap creates what mathematicians call local gluing constraints.
Oh, so if the electrical blueprint says the shared wall is 10 feet long and the plumbing blueprint says that same wall is 12 feet long, the blueprints can't be glued together.
The projection fails.
The projection becomes totally inconsistent.
So this form of coarse graining isn't just about throwing away high-resolution data to save space.
It's about enforcing rigorous mathematical rules on how the remaining chunks of data are allowed to connect to one another.
That makes the recursive tiling part of TARTAN really clear, but we need to look at the N, which stands for annotated noise.
Yes.
And this is where I started to really struggle with the paper's logic, to be honest.
When you compress a digital file, you naturally introduce noise, right?
Random digital artifacts, static lost data.
It's just the cost of compression.
True.
But Flyxion insists that the noise in this projection, denoted as etta sub i, is not independent random static.
They call it annotated and claim it encodes a memory kernel.
They do.
I got to push back here.
Noise, by definition, is supposed to be random.
How can random static encode a memory?
That sounds like a contradiction in terms.
I get why you'd say that.
It sounds contradictory if you view noise purely as exogenous interference, like radio static coming from outside the system.
Yeah.
But in the TARTAN framework, the noise is endogenous.
It's a byproduct of the overlapping tiles failing to perfectly capture those underlying RSVP dynamics we talked about.
The information that is lost during the coarse graining doesn't just vanish into the ether.
It gets embedded into the boundary conditions of the tiles as residual data.
Wait, so the noise is actually the structural shadow of the data we couldn't fit into the compression.
That is a beautiful way to phrase it.
It is the structural shadow.
Because the overlapping tiles enforce those local gluing constraints, the unresolved mismatches, the noise-preserved remnants of past states.
Oh, wow.
This is what the memory kernel is.
It isn't a conscious memory, obviously.
It's a mathematical retention of prior tilings.
It remembers what it was before it was pixelated.
Exactly.
And this leads to a massive claim about how time functions.
The paper argues that because of this memory kernel, the dynamics of the universe are non-Markovian.
Let's make sure we have a solid grip on that concept.
A Markovian process, as I understand it, is one where the future state of a system depends only on its present state.
The past is totally irrelevant.
Like, if I flip a fair coin and it lands on heads ten times in a row, the odds of it landing on heads the eleventh time are still exactly fifty-fifty.
The coin has no memory of the previous ten flips.
The system is entirely contained in the present moment.
That is the classic definition of a Markovian process.
And it underpins a massive amount of classical physics and statistical mechanics.
We like to model systems this way because, honestly, it makes the math tractable.
Sure, it's easier to calculate.
Much easier.
But Flyxion argues that reality's projection is fundamentally non-Markovian.
Intermediate, instantaneous states do not form a sufficient statistic for predicting future evolution.
History actually matters to the math.
It's structurally unavoidable.
Yeah?
Because of the overlapping nature of the tiles, and because of the geometric torsion in the vector field we discussed earlier.
The way the directional flow twists.
Yes, exactly.
Because of that twist, the past is structurally retained in the boundaries of the present.
You cannot slice the universe into isolated, infinitely thin present moments.
The twisting vector field and the memory-bearing noise guarantee that temporal correlations persist across time.
So the universe's compression algorithm deliberately hold on to the history of its own dynamics in the margins.
It refuses to let the past go entirely.
That's the implication, yes.
Okay, if the universe is doing this, holding on to history, enforcing overlapping gluing constraints, generating memory out of noise,
how does that translate to what a physicist actually measures in a laboratory?
Up until this point, we've been talking about very abstract geometry.
How does this explain the real world?
Well, this is where Flyxion bridges the gap to observable physics, and it requires shifting how we define a state of reality.
In classical physics, we often think of a particle at a specific coordinate in space at a specific time, a dot on a grid.
Right.
But under the TARTAN coarse-graining map, we do not project single instantaneous dots.
We project equivalence classes of paths.
We're looking at boundaries in path space, not physical space.
Exactly.
So instead of looking at a dot, we are evaluating the entire trajectory of that dot over time.
We evaluate the trajectory through a path functional, denoted as psi of gamma.
Observable transition frequencies, the actual data a physicist records in an experiment, arise from integrating over these equivalence classes of paths.
Okay.
And this leads us to the first of the paper's three major load-bearing claims.
It deals with transition matrices, specifically the distinction between a bistochastic operator and a unistochastic operator.
Here's where it gets really interesting.
I'm going to try an analogy here to see if I'm grasping the difference, because the math gets very dense in this section.
Please do.
Imagine you're tasked with monitoring traffic through a massive, complex city intersection.
If you apply a purely measure-theoretic coarse-graining, meaning you only care about preserving the total volume or entropy of the system,
you might just count the transition frequencies.
Okay, so just counting cars.
Right.
You note that 100 cars entered the intersection from the north, and eventually 50 exited to the east and 50 exited to the west.
That's a bistochastic view.
It preserves the uniform distribution.
You balance the books.
The ins equal the outs.
The total probability is conserved, and every row and column sums to one.
A purely entropy-preserving compression would yield this bistochastic matrix.
You know the macroscopic flow, but you've washed out all the individual details.
But the paper states that the RSVP framework mathematically selects a unistochastic operator instead.
It does.
So in my traffic analogy, a unistochastic view wouldn't just count the raw volume of cars.
It retains specific, coherent information about the journeys.
It knows that the red sedan that exited to the east entered at 40 miles per hour, had its turn signal on for three blocks, and was forced to swerve around a pothole.
It retains the structural, directional history of the individual paths.
That's a great way to picture it.
But my question is, why?
Why does the system retain this extra, highly complex phase information?
Why doesn't it just take the easy route and collapse into a simple bistochastic headcount?
Like, that seems so much more efficient.
The answer brings us back to the vector field V, and specifically, its torsion.
The twist again.
The twist.
Because the underlying dynamics involve this twisting, path-dependent flow, the core screening process cannot merely tally up the endpoints of the transitions.
It is mathematically forced to retain residual orientation information from the line integrals along those paths.
The twist forces the system to remember the exact route taken.
It retains the orientation.
And this retained orientation induces what Flyxion calls a phase functional, omega of gamma.
And this is critical.
When these different paths compose or combine with one another, their phases don't just jumble together into random noise.
They don't?
No.
They add up coherently.
They preserve the underlying composition structure of the paths.
And because it preserves that phase coherence, it forces the mathematical operator into a unitary class.
Which, I mean, that is the absolute bedrock of quantum mechanics, right?
It is.
The transition amplitudes define a representation of the path composition, forcing the amplitude operator to be unitary.
The profound implication here is that Hilbert space, the complex, multidimensional mathematical space that physicists use to calculate quantum states, is not assumed to be a fundamental magical property of the universe.
It emerges.
It emerges entirely from the symmetry and phase coherence of the TARTAN projection.
That's incredible.
The fundamental difference between classical, everyday randomness and the strange, wave-like probability we see in quantum mechanics is not a difference in the physical stuff of the universe.
It's a property of how the projection defines path equivalence.
Wait, really?
So if the projection didn't retain that coherent phase information?
If it dropped the memory of the twist, the universe would collapse back into simple, classical, bistochastic probability.
That is a staggering reconceptualization.
Quantum weirdness isn't a feature of the subatomic particles.
It's an artifact of the universe's compression algorithm retaining historical phase data.
That's the claim.
I do want to interject with a point of rigor here, though, because independent researchers often get accused of glossing over the holes in their theories, right?
Very true.
But Flyxion actually points out a specific open problem in their own math right at this juncture.
They mention something called the Madelung complexification.
Can you translate that into plain English for us?
Sure.
The Madelung equations were formulated in the 1920s as a way to rewrite the Schrodinger equation, which is the core equation of quantum mechanics, using the mathematics of fluid dynamics.
It's a way of showing that quantum probabilities behave somewhat like a physical fluid.
Okay.
Flyxion explicitly notes that while their TARTAN projection naturally yields a unitary operator, it remains an open structural problem whether this operator is perfectly mathematically identical to the one derived from the traditional Madelung complexification in all general cases.
So they're admitting, hey, we've built a bridge that looks exactly like quantum mechanics, but we haven't mathematically proven that every single bolt aligns with the traditional models yet.
Exactly. It's an area for future rigorous proof.
I appreciate that level of intellectual honesty.
It builds trust for what comes next.
Because if completely rewriting the foundations of quantum mechanics wasn't enough, we now arrive at the paper's next major pivot.
This is where it gets wild.
The author claims that this exact same mathematical structure, overlapping tiles, gluing constraints, non-Markovian memory, governs human cognition, the way your mind builds a model of reality.
And this is where the power of category theory in those structure-preserving functors becomes evident.
The paper introduces a specific functor, F-sub-PC, which maps the category of physical systems to the category of cognitive systems.
The translator device.
We take the math of the RSVP universe and apply it to the brain.
We're no longer talking about vector fields and energy potentials.
The objects are now cognitive data, semantic meaning, and mental representations.
But the invariant structure, the math of how the system tries to achieve consistency, remains perfectly intact.
Flyxion defines cognition in a very rigorous way here.
It's the continuous attempt to extend locally consistent projections, the individual cognitive tiles, into a globally consistent section.
So the brain is basically trying to stitch a bunch of fragmented observations into a single, coherent worldview.
Exactly.
And the analogy that helped me visualize this was an M.C. Escher drawing.
Oh, that's a perfect analogy.
Think of the famous lithograph with the monks walking on an ascending and descending staircase.
If you take a magnifying glass and look at any local, specific part of that drawing, just one single stair or one corner of the courtyard, it makes perfect logical sense.
Yeah, right. Locally, it's fine.
The step connects to the next step.
The geometry works.
The local tile is consistent.
But when your brain zooms out and tries to stitch all those local tiles together into a global image, they form an impossible, paradoxical loop.
Yes.
The stairs go up forever, but end up back where they started.
The local sections violently refuse to glue together globally.
That is a flawless visualization of what the paper formalizes as a cohomological obstruction.
Let's unpack that term, because cohomological obstruction, I mean, it sounds like a medical emergency, like an artery is blocked.
What is actually failing in the math?
Well, cohomology is a branch of mathematics that studies the properties of a space that remain unchanged even if you stretch or bend it.
An obstruction, in this context, is a mathematical invariant that measures exactly how badly a system fails to glue together over its overlapping regions.
Okay.
The paper details an H1 obstruction.
This specific class of obstruction captures pairwise gluing failures.
It occurs when two locally consistent descriptions, two overlapping cognitive tiles, simply cannot be reconciled on the boundary they share.
I want to make this tangible.
An H1 obstruction in human cognition would be like holding two deeply conflicting beliefs at the same time.
Let's say you have a deeply held belief that a specific friend is kind and generous.
That's one cognitive tile.
Then you witness them do something incredibly cruel.
That's an overlapping tile based on new sensory data.
Your brain tries to glue the past model of the friend with the current behavior on the shared boundary of their identity.
And it fails.
You experience cognitive dissonance.
Yes.
Cognitive dissonance is the psychological experience of a cohomological obstruction.
And the math scales up, too.
Higher level, multi-scale inconsistencies, where maybe local pairs of beliefs work fine in isolation, but when you combine three or four complex ideas, they break down.
Those might require higher order obstructions like H2.
Wow.
And this raises an incredibly important question about human psychology.
How do we rigorously define a concept like hallucination or an irrational belief?
In this framework, a hallucination isn't just a misfiring chemical in the visual cortex.
Formally, it's the persistent non-existence of a global section.
Wait, say that again?
It is the mathematical failure to solve a sheaf extension problem.
The brain cannot find a way to make the overlapping data agree, so it constructs a localized, impossible geometry to bridge the gap.
Your brain is essentially trying to compile the raw code of reality, and it keeps throwing a compilation error.
So how does the mind attempt to debug the code?
Flyxion introduces a cognitive mechanism called CLIO, which stands for Cognitive Loop Via In-Situ Optimization.
Right. CLIO acts as the adaptive update operator.
It's the continuous, dynamic mental machinery that tries to resolve those gluing errors over the tile boundaries.
It tweaks the local projections, trying to reach a fixed point where everything is globally coherent.
And as CLIO works to resolve these errors, the mind shifts between different coherent worldviews or different fixed points of belief.
Yes.
The paper makes a fascinating distinction here about how that shift occurs.
It asks whether different belief states are separated energetically or topologically.
I need you to explain the difference, because it seems crucial to understanding how people actually change their minds.
It is a profound distinction.
If two beliefs are separated energetically, it means they're divided by regions of high mental effort or cognitive friction, what the framework calls high entropy or large gradients.
Okay.
But importantly, an energetic barrier can be crossed gradually.
You can slowly update your beliefs step by step.
A sufficient accumulation of new data or a continuous effort of thought can push you over the energy barrier.
In mathematical terms, it's a continuous deformation.
Like slowly changing your political affiliation over a decade.
You read a dozen books, you have hundreds of conversations, and you slowly, incrementally deform your worldview until you arrive at a new belief.
You energetically climbed over the hill.
Exactly right.
That's energetic separation.
But if beliefs are separated topologically, the mechanism of change is entirely different.
Topologically separated beliefs lie in fundamentally distinct homotopy classes.
Homotopy classes.
Knowing what?
Meaning that no continuous deformation can connect them without completely violating the local consistency rules.
You cannot get there step by step.
The space between the beliefs is structurally broken.
You can't slowly bend one shape into the other without tearing the fabric of the geometry.
So if you can't get there slowly, you have to jump.
You have to jump.
You need a massive discontinuous gestalt shift.
An epiphany.
The entire paradigm has to collapse and rebuild instantly in the new configuration.
A qualitative structural shift in understanding.
You see this in scientific revolutions or sudden religious conversions.
Flitchin notes that determining which mechanism dominates energetic climbing or topological jumping in a given cognitive regime is another open mathematical problem.
But recognizing the difference fundamentally changes how we most model persuasion, learning, and cognitive change.
If someone is stuck in a topologically separated belief, giving them incremental data won't work.
The structural geometry of their worldview literally prevents the data from gluing.
Exactly.
It just bounces off.
This is an incredible insight into human behavior, but Flyxion does not stop at psychology.
We now follow the structure-preserving functor into the final domain.
The deep dive takes its most radical turn here.
We are taking the math of the RSVP universe, the math of the cognitive sheaf, and applying it to the digital economy.
Yes, the author introduces functor F-sub, mapping this entire architecture to the realm of economic structures and platform dynamics.
And here we encounter the third load-bearing claim of the paper.
It's a fundamental redefinition of what an economic agent actually is.
Right.
In traditional economics, and especially in the design of modern digital platforms, an agent is treated as a static region or an instantaneous state.
You're a node in a graph.
You're a profile page, an account ID, a row in a relational database containing your current age, location, and account balance.
You are a dot.
A frozen point in time.
But Flyxion argues this static representation is structurally incorrect and mathematically fatal to the health of an economic system.
Definition 2 in the paper states that an agent is not a node.
An agent is an equivalence class of paths in the coarse-grained state space.
Let me pause to process the implications of that.
Because if I am an equivalence class of paths, this means I am not my username.
I am not my current bank balance or my demographic data.
I am the literal, unbroken historical trajectory of every Uber ride I've ever taken, every product I've ever purchased, every post I have ever written, and every commitment I've fulfilled or broken.
You are your trajectory.
Your identity is given its economic and social meaning entirely by its history.
Economic actions are not dots bumping into each other in a marketplace.
They are morphisms, transformations, and connections between segments of these long historical trajectories.
A market is an interaction pattern between paths.
Which, I mean, that makes intuitive sense.
When I hire someone, I don't just care about their current stat of state.
I care about their resume, their history of reliability, their trajectory.
Exactly.
But in the digital economy, we don't interact directly with each other's trajectories.
The platforms intercede.
This brings in the concept of the secondary projection.
If we are all these complex historical paths moving through time, digital platforms like a dating app, a social network, or a gig work platform step in and create an interface.
They project our complex trajectories into a simplified format.
Visibility metrics, ranking algorithms, matchmaking feeds.
And this secondary projection is where the structural vulnerability of the modern internet is exposed.
In a healthy functioning system, this secondary projection preserves the underlying trajectory structure.
It makes matching meaningful.
You want a ride, a driver wants a fare, the platform aligns to the trajectories, the interaction completes, and both paths continue smoothly.
Right.
But digital platforms are highly susceptible to a specific structural deformation.
This brings us to the absolute climax of the paper's argument.
It answers the question we all constantly ask.
Why do good platforms inevitably go bad?
Why does the dating app seem mathematically designed to keep you swiping endlessly, rather than actually finding you a long-term partner?
Why does the gig app constantly squeeze both the drivers and the riders while the service noticeably degrades?
Why does every social network eventually feel like a hostile environment?
Flyxion calls this the extraction attractor.
The extraction attractor.
The paper describes an extractive platform as a pathological configuration of the secondary projection.
This pathology occurs when the platform's internal projection algorithm becomes distorted, such that the platform's revenue becomes proportional not to successful path completion, but to the fragmentation of the user's trajectories.
The platform realizes, mathematically, that it can generate more profit by breaking your path rather than fulfilling it.
And Flyxion provides a concrete mathematical equation for this, the interface entropy equation.
Yes.
It's written as, let me get this right, the partial derivative of revenue, R, with respect to interface entropy, H, must be less than or equal to zero.
Correct.
Partial R over partial H is less than or equal to zero.
Explain what this means for a healthy business.
Interface entropy, H, represents disorder, confusion, and unresolved interactions within the platform.
For a healthy, non-extractive platform, the equation states that infrastructure revenue must be non-increasing as interface disorder goes up.
Okay.
If the system gets messier, if rides fail, if users get confused, if matches don't result in dates,
the platform should suffer financially.
They should not make more money off a degraded, chaotic experience.
But extractive platforms completely violate this equation.
They flip the incentive structure.
They start making money off the disorder.
They profit directly from broken, delayed, or mutually incompatible paths.
Yes.
In an extractive regime, interface entropy becomes a positive contributor to platform revenue.
The derivative becomes greater than zero.
Let me map this onto a tangible example that every listener will recognize.
Think about a highly toxic social media feed.
In a healthy, trajectory-preserving projection, the platform would simply connect your path,
your desire to share a photograph of your new puppy, with your friend's path,
their desire to see updates about your life.
Path completed.
The interface entropy is low.
Perfect.
But the platform's algorithm realizes that a completed, satisfying path means you might smile,
put the phone down, and close the app.
That stops the revenue stream.
The worst possible outcome for them.
Exactly.
So instead, the platform deliberately distorts the projection.
It shows you infuriating, polarized, out-of-context content from someone you don't even know.
It shows you things precisely designed to induce a cohomological obstruction in your mind.
It creates cognitive dissonance.
Yes.
It fragments your cognitive trajectory.
It creates massive entropy disorder, confusion, unresolved arguments,
and it monetizes the time you spend trapped in that fractured state,
desperately trying to glue the pieces back together.
That is an incredibly accurate application of the model.
The platform is profiting from the continuous fragmentation of your cognitive and economic path.
And the paper details mechanistically how a platform falls into this state.
It is described as a phase transition.
When a platform is young, it has to compete for users by actually producing value by completing trajectories efficiently.
But eventually, two specific conditions are met.
First, the platform achieves high exit costs.
They trap you.
And they trap you specifically because they own your trajectory history.
You can't easily leave a major social network because your 10 years of photographs, friendships,
and professional connections are locked inside their proprietary database.
You can't take your reputation history from one gig app to a competitor.
Your historical path is held hostage.
Precisely.
The trajectory is captured.
The second condition is centralized control over that secondary projection.
The platform alone owns the proprietary algorithm that maps those trajectories into visibility and rankings.
Once both of these conditions hold captured history and centralized projection,
an irreversible phase transition occurs.
The competitive environment mathematically selects for extraction.
It becomes an attractor state in the dynamic system.
An attractor state means it pulls everything toward it.
It's an evolutionary trap.
Platforms that don't extract.
Platforms that just honestly complete trajectories, keep entropy low, and let people log off,
get fundamentally out-competed in the marketplace by those that monetize the disorder.
The honest platforms cannot extract the surplus value generated by trapping users in high entropy states,
so they die off, leaving only the extractive behemoths.
The tragedy here is that the system is stable not because a malicious CEO designed it to be evil,
but because the underlying structural incentives blindly select for extraction.
The sheaf-like consistency conditions that support healthy global coordination
are actively dismantled because the math dictates it's more profitable to do so.
That is terrifying.
It means the toxicity, the addiction, and the friction of our digital lives aren't bugs.
They aren't glitches in the system.
They are a mathematically stable attractor state.
And this brings us to an incredibly urgent warning in the paper regarding the immediate future.
Because Flyxion isn't just analyzing the social networks of the 2010s,
they're looking at the explosion of artificial intelligence.
The paper warns that cognitive infrastructure AI systems that are increasingly embedded directly into
our daily workflows, our writing, our coding, our decision-making,
is entering this exact same evolutionary trajectory.
Historically, the choke point for extraction was access to physical labor,
like with ride-sharing, or access to attention, like with social media feeds.
But with AI, the choke point is shifting deeper.
It's shifting to access to the cognitive projection itself.
The capacity to perform structured inference over a semantic field.
Yes.
If artificial intelligence platforms become the primary mediator for our literal cognitive sheaf-igators,
the very tools we use to construct meaning, resolve complex data, and extend local ideas into a global
understanding, and those AI platforms fall into the extraction attractor, the consequences are severe.
Because if an AI platform falls into the attractor, it will mathematically inevitably monetize the
fragmentation of our understanding.
It will profit directly from our cognitive dissonance.
If the AI company makes more money the longer you interact with the chatbot,
the AI is financially incentivized to generate interface entropy at the level of human meaning.
Keeping us confused, reliant, constantly iterating, and continuously prompting the system
is more profitable than actually resolving our cognitive trajectory with a single, clear, coherent answer.
That is the stark reality of the warning.
The extraction attractor is migrating from the layer of economic transactions
into the layer where human meaning and truth are formed.
If the AI benefits from your cohomological obstructions,
it will ensure you never reach a global section of understanding.
Okay, we need a lifeline here.
I am feeling thoroughly trapped in the attractor state right now.
Is it completely hopeless, or does the math offer a way out?
It does offer a way out.
Thank goodness.
The final section of the paper outlines what Flyxion calls
escaping the attractor non-extractive architectures.
They claim there is a mathematical escape route,
but it requires designing alternative digital systems
at the fundamental functorial projection level.
They list four specific, rigorous conditions for building a non-extractive architecture.
Let's walk through them.
What is the first condition?
The first condition is that proposals on the platform must be typed commitments,
not just access tokens or purchased visibility.
They must represent true morphisms between trajectory segments.
And crucially, this ties immediately into the second condition, trajectory identity.
Identity must be cryptographically or structurally bound to the trajectory itself,
not to the namespace or the platform's database.
I want to make sure I grasp the practical difference here.
What does it mean to bind identity to the trajectory rather than the namespace?
It means you cannot just lease a username, like an at handle, and consider that the economic agent.
The economic and social value of the identity is inseparable from its history of actions.
A name without the trajectory is inert.
If you want to build a genuinely healthy platform,
the users must mathematically own their historical trajectories.
Oh, I see.
The platform cannot have the power to hold the history hostage or sever the user from their past interactions.
The user carries their path with them.
If you own your trajectory, the exit costs drop to near zero.
If the platform starts extracting, you just take your entire history and plug it into a different interface.
That leads directly to the third condition, decomposable matching.
The paper talks about a plurality of interpretation functors, multiple F-sub-I operators operating over a shared event category.
This is the mathematical countermeasure to centralized control.
Instead of one single corporation owning a monolithic feed or a black box ranking algorithm,
the architecture must support a shared base-level database of events.
Then, you have multiple independent interpretation algorithms, different functors,
that users can voluntarily choose from to project those events into visibility.
Control over relevance and matching is structurally distributed.
So no single authority can manipulate the projection to extract value.
If algorithm A starts monetizing my cognitive dissonance, I instantly switch to algorithm B,
which prioritizes completing my trajectory.
That's nice.
And the final condition is perhaps the most elegant, bond conservation.
This is a brilliant economic constraint built into the math.
Bond conservation dictates that platforms absolutely cannot profit from unresolved proposals.
If an interaction fails, if the trajectory fragments, if the ride is canceled,
if the match is a scam, the stake, whether that's financial capital, attention,
or computational resources, must fully return to the participants.
The platform is strictly prohibited from taking a cut of failed interactions.
It structurally prevents the platform from violating the interface entropy equation.
It cuts off the food supply to the extraction attractor.
Yes.
If they cannot profit from the interface entropy,
the fundamental mechanism of extraction is structurally unavailable to them.
They can only make money when trajectory is successfully complete.
These four conditions-typed commitments, trajectory identity, decomposable matching,
and bond conservation define a mathematically safe projection regime.
But, Flyxion ends the paper with a sobering reality check.
They pose what they call the ultimate open empirical question.
Even if we build this mathematically perfect, non-extractive architecture,
even if the code is flawless, can it survive?
Can it survive the brutal evolutionary pressure of the extractive competitors
before it reaches critical mass?
The non-extractive architecture is mathematically necessary for long-term health,
but it may not be socially or competitively sufficient in the short term.
The existing extractive platforms have massive capital,
entrenched network effects,
and the ability to ruthlessly monetize interface entropy to fund their defense.
The environment might crush the healthy system before the network effects can take hold.
It's the ultimate test of whether human coordination can out-engineer an evolutionary trap.
Wow.
We have covered an immense amount of conceptual ground today.
Let's try to synthesize this massive journey.
We started at the absolute basement of reality,
with the underlying coupled fields of the RSVP universe,
the energy landscape, the directional flow,
and the fundamental multiplicity of entropy generated by the torsion of that flow.
We saw how any localized observer has to compress that infinite detail into manageable overlapping tiles
using TARTAN coarse graining,
and we learned how the non-Markovian memory embedded in the noise of those overlapping edges
preserves phase coherence, giving rise to the very laws of quantum mechanics.
From that physical foundation, we followed the structure-preserving functor into the human mind.
We saw how our cognition utilizes that exact same mathematical projection.
We tried to stitch local, consistent cognitive tiles into a global understanding.
And we learned that cognitive dissonance and hallucinations are not biological glitches,
but cohomological obstructions, the mathematical failure to resolve overlapping realities.
We saw how the mind must either energetically climb to a new belief
or undergo a sudden topological gestalt shift.
And finally, we tracked that same functorial structure into the digital economy.
We fundamentally redefined ourselves.
We are not static dots on a server.
We are dynamic, unbroken historical trajectories.
And we saw the mathematical proof of why digital platforms become toxic.
The extraction attractor mathematically incentivizes companies to distort the interface,
intentionally generating interface entropy,
and profiting from the fragmentation of our economic and cognitive paths.
The unifying thread across all of this is profound.
Physics, human cognition, and digital economics are ontologically distinct domains.
A subatomic particle is not a thought, and a thought is not a digital gig worker.
But they all suffer the exact same structural vulnerabilities
when a high-dimensional, complex reality is compressed into an interface.
The laws of projection are invariant.
And that leaves us with a final, very provocative thought to ponder as we wrap up this deep dive.
Flyxion's paper suggests that your identity is not a static container that you fill with data.
It is an active historical trajectory navigating a landscape of overlapping projections.
If the digital platforms we rely on are currently mathematically incentivized to fragment those paths for profit,
what does it mean to truly reclaim ownership of your own trajectory?
How do you ensure that the global section of your own life, your own mind, remains coherent,
when the digital interfaces you use every single day are mathematically designed to monetize your disorientation?
It's something that really makes you re-evaluate every tap, every swipe, and every interaction on your screen.
We want to thank you so much for joining us on this incredibly complex, mind-bending journey today.
Keep questioning the maps you were given, and keep interrogating the interfaces that shape your reality.